I just have to introduce this at the top Bob, that's okay. So I'm Marcia O'Mahony and I'm here with Simon Hicks and we're here today to interview Hickman, sorry Simon, Simon Hickman and we're here today to interview Bob Trett and it's Bob Trett, is that right?
T-R-E-double T
Okay and we're at Kaleon and it is Thursday April 25th 2019. So I'm just going to pop that down there Bob. It is going. Yeah, there we go.
I wonder Bob if we can start off, Simon and I are going to pitch in together.
Sure.
If you could just introduce yourself, who you are, your background.
Okay, well my name is Bob Trett. I wasn't born here but I used to be a curator at different museums and I was employed as the curator at the Newport Museum and Art Gallery in 1983.
I have to try and remember that exactly. And I had a double job, one was being the curator which had been like his administratively in charge in the museum and art gallery and to a lesser degree of tradiga house when he was in the council's control.
Although I had a very good curator there anyway so I didn't really have to do much. But the museum itself had moved in the 1960s and they were still in the process of re-displaying it.
The art gallery was fine, it had been completed but most of the museum needed re-displaying so one of the first jobs I was given by the council was to re-display the museum.
There were various keepers there, staff, very clever people who knew a lot and in charge of collections some of them had been there for a long time.
But the main collections were, if you like, the natural sciences including geology, a good geology collection, birds, in fact including I noticed the last ibis shot on the seven levels, way back sometime.
So they had the natural history collections, various types of stuff, a lot of it, stuffed animals of course.
They had a very good archeology collection, mostly Roman from the Roman town of Coent, which is on the Etchley levels, from excavations in the 1900s.
They had a very good social history collection, local history collection, well still do of course, and then of course the art collections which were on the floor above.
And they all linked in pretty well as well. So my job first of all was to start with re-displays and the first thing we did was to re-display the medieval collection.
A lot of that's now gone but we did that because a lot of fresh medieval material was coming in, places like Skinfriff Castle and from Penhowar Castle and from Lanternie Priory and so on.
So it was a can-do-why collection. So anyway, so that was displayed, a lot of help from Caddo and other people to put it together.
And then the next section we did was on the local history collections, which started in sort of 18th century really, included the Chartists of course, because there's a good Chartist collection.
And then mainly on Newport Industry and Civic Life and so on. A lot of that is still there, it's adapted a bit now.
But of course the port was there and they're still working and so on. So there was quite a lot of material which we couldn't show but some of which we could for the very first time.
And then we did the archaeology. Well the first part of the archaeology was the prehistory. And they'd already had some cases put in.
And we reckon there was about, the tools weren't very secure, but there was about 13 items in the collections from prehistory of Gwent, not just Newport.
And there was about 13 cases to put them in. So we were very short on material.
And so what happened was that we started to cultivate lots of metal detectors. Some of them had actually been on the levels and out there.
And I became involved with the Glamour Gwent Archaeological Trust. They went out and they were a great help.
But the man that gave the most help to us, because he came in with a load of iron-edge pottery, which had my eyeballs going out like this, was a man called Derek Upton.
And Derek I think lived near Sudbrook. He was born out there. And even as a child he used to say he would wander over the seawall, almost as a toddler, and wander around to the mudflats and then came back and still alive.
So he was a fascinating guy. We came very, very close. So whenever he found anything he would ring up and we would go out and have a look.
And various other colleagues and volunteers I had helping me, including a gentleman called Steve Parry, who was very brilliant at, he was a sort of archaeologist, come eco man, but he was very brilliant at spotting things.
So Derek would point out stuff. So I went down and had a little investigation on the channel where all this iron-edge pottery was coming out of. And these two went walking along the foreshore.
This was, what's never the place, I'll forget. Anyway, they finished up a place called Chappeltump, which was a couple of miles away.
They came running back and said, we've got a prehistoric platform there.
This is out in the estuary.
This was in the estuary. And all sorts of stuff. So I went and had a look and there they had hurdles which had been laid down and were pegged in to the ground. But of course no idea of dates.
But we had contacts with the University in Cardiff.
And we managed to get a whole series of radio comm dates done and things and this turned out to be Iron Age.
I can't remember offhand the date because I've been retired for so many years, but anyway it was Iron Age before the Romans.
And alongside it they started finding Bronze-Edge pottery.
And we found a Bronze-Edge working site which they had bits of flint obviously were brought in, big pits in which they were burning stuff.
And I even found a little bone piercing pin which had been manufactured.
And so the stuff from Chappeltump was quite important.
And then it just snowballed from there.
This was at, oh I've forgotten the name of the place now, there's a pill down there, Magor Pill, which I started out from.
And Derek found all sorts of other stuff out there of all different periods.
And so we then followed him to Goldcliff.
And we went out to Goldcliff because he was discovering Mesolithic, some early prehistoric material coming up.
Broken bones and stuff that had been burnt.
And there was obviously an island there and trees had been burnt off.
But there are lots of things like boar and wild deer and in the piece of a wild wolf, I think.
So they were all mixed in with the charcoal and stuff.
So again we were able to get it dated.
And with some help from the University and the Trust, the Morgwain Archaeological Trust, we managed to start some surveys off there as well.
So this was all happening very well.
Well, the next thing, we walked on a bit further and we started finding one thing after another after another after another.
One of the most fascinating things, which we found all the way along the foreshore, was stumps of trees or trees which had fallen over.
And if you got there, you could be out there and you could be thinking you were actually in the forest.
If you just look down, you can see where all the trees were.
So you know exactly how it was.
And of course the estuary is made up of layers of peat and layers of alluvium or clay.
And there's a whole sammage of them.
And each tide drops extra mud down.
But of course you get fierce storms and everything gets wiped away.
So this is why all these things were being discovered.
We had a great time going through this.
And then we went a bit further on from Gouldcliffe, as I was saying.
And we bumped into more fishing traps, all sorts of stuff.
And then we suddenly found a hut.
Well, it's just the base of a hut.
But it had partitions inside it and it had a reed floor.
And that turned out to be our nature.
And it was part of a small settlement.
There were several of them around there.
And I think people were probably using them for cattle.
And it was really far too much for us to cope with on our own.
And then because the next thing happened, Derek rang up very excitedly and said,
It had just been off Nash near the mouth of the usk.
And he'd come across, in the lower levels, embedded in the clay, a set of human footprints.
So I mean we were busy photographing everything.
So by this point everybody knew what was happening.
So all the archaeological bigwigs from around gathered together.
And we had a meeting at the University and the National Museum were there as well,
because they had found some additional items there.
And we'd found an aurochs, which was quite interesting, at Nash as well,
which is like a wild cow.
And this was a massive big thing.
Bits of it are on display in the museum.
In fact, most of what's on display in the museum and the new prehistoric displays
came from the discoveries in the 7th century,
together with some more material which was found by metal detector users inland as well.
So from having virtually nothing, we've changed it up in quite an important connection
covering a whole of prehistory, including hand axes,
which are the earliest type of artefact you tend to find, and very rare.
There were a couple that had been brought down by Glacier Laction, I imagine, into the estuary.
So they're on display in the museum.
I think the National Museum were a bit jealous of all this,
but nevertheless everyone was very cooperative.
So nobody had really gone out and done what you had done?
Nobody really, no.
There'd been one hut circle which had been excavated at Chapel Tump,
perhaps known as Chapel Tump 1, a few years earlier by Stephen Oldhouse Green,
who was the prehistorian at the National Museum of Wales.
But it'd been a sort of wall off.
There was other people working on the geology and the river flows and tidal things and all this.
And of course the whole area was SSSI as well, so there was that aspect of it all.
But nobody really looked there.
And they'd looked on the other side, because obviously at Glastonbury,
where, I can't remember what it's called now, it's because I'm getting old.
But anyway, there were all sorts of stuff come up from the wetlands on the other side.
And here we are.
Somerset Louse, yes.
A little booklet like this shows the sort of stuff that they were fighting.
We were fighting similar things as well.
There was an enormously important site there, whose name, well near Glastonbury.
So that was the sort of stuff that was known about.
But obviously the same thing was happening on our side.
After the prehistory on the mudflats into tidal area,
they started finding it in profusion on the Londonward side of the seawall.
In particular, we found, when they were doing some excavations of the Col de Cot Castle,
part of a huge plank which was part of a Bronze Age boat and various other things,
which was done through the Archaeological Trust.
But then another one they found was a Roman boat,
a virtually complete small Roman boat called the Barlands Farm Boat,
when they were putting it in Guernierot Park.
So with the help of the Trust who were digging it,
and the Conservator we had, Kate Hunter, we excavated that,
and that came in the museum and that's in store with the Remains of Newport ship.
Other boats had been, we also discovered there was about an 1800 canal boat up at Newbridge, up the Usk.
That was very early and all handmade, it was very interesting,
but most of that was now gone, disappeared.
Where's it gone?
Well, it was excavated, and it was, you know, how big a canal boat is.
They did it by putting a bund in the river,
and they pumped it all out and there was this boat, and it was excavated and recorded.
And then they were thinking about what to do with it,
and just at that moment they had one of these flash floods,
so the whole boat lifted out of the water, not the water, the river bed,
and was taken over the bund and floated down several hundred yards,
so it smashed up against the bank.
Now the man who was advising us, was a man called Professor John McGrail,
well-known eminent sort of maritime archaeologist.
He said, well, it's actually not a bad thing,
because he can now look at all the bits individually, which is what they did.
And the bits were then transferred to Newport to an old warehouse that's now gone,
and they were recorded and a report published.
Bits were left in the museum, and I don't know whether,
I think most of them are probably there and kept.
How old was it?
About 1800.
Gosh.
But in fact it was all handmade, and it was flat-bottomed.
It was so similar in many ways to the Roman boat,
the way the fittings worked and so on, that that was the interesting part of it.
Was it like a tro, then?
Well, no, it was a canal boat, you know, pointy at both ends,
and it was obviously towed from a towing post up the river.
I think it probably had a small mast as well, probably from up to Newbridge.
And there was stuff used to come down the river from Newbridge to Caleon and then on to Newport.
And when it was abandoned, because it was old,
they just put it onto the river bankers to help the river defences.
So that's how we found it.
But that was the first one that created quite a stir.
When was this? What sort of period was this? Was this the early 80s?
Well, it was probably built around about 1800 when the first canals were also coming in,
although it seems to be no river craft rather than a canal boat.
It doesn't sort of fit in with the early Monmouthshire canal boats.
But it was found in the early 1980s, was it?
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes, I've got slides.
The trouble is that I used to know this off my heart and I forget it all,
but I've got the record still.
And most of the stuff went into the museum, the museum archives as well.
So anyway, so that was Tridentic Boat.
Then there was the Roman boat, the Barlands Farm Boat.
Then there was the Caldecott Bronze Age Planks, but enormous.
And then one medieval boat was found at Magor Pill.
And quite frankly, we'd got enough going on to do that.
So the National Museum were very keen to take that project on.
So they did.
They did.
And what remained of that boat went into the National Museum collections,
not on show, but it's there.
But, you know, in essence, there was almost a unique collection of early boats
of different periods that had been found.
And it would be nice at some point for them to all merge together and be displayed.
But of course, the duel in the crown didn't happen until 2002 when the Newport ship,
but that's a later story, I was in the museum until about 2000.
And we had a steady programme of material coming in and recording it.
And we were sort of in the early stages of computerising records.
So all that came in.
When I came there, there were handwritten cards and nice little volumes of accessions
with little hand-drawn pictures in some places next to a description.
And now, of course, it's all digital and everything else.
So totally different goal game.
And of course, the photography, the fact that you get digital photography has changed everything.
So all the old photographs, probably not similar ones I've got actually,
but have now been digitalised or on archives, in the archives, on the museum or wherever.
And of course, the other aspect was a lot of publication went on as well.
So that was my involvement.
But the Newport ship, I think you described it as the duel in the crown.
Can you tell us about that? Were you there when it was discovered?
Yes, I was.
At what point did you get involved?
Well, it's quite interesting because when I retired from the museum,
I moved here and I was mainly doing guided tours around Killian.
But I was still involved with the Glenborne Quintine Archive Archaeological Trust based in Swansea.
And for many years I've been the chairman of the trustees.
So I had a very close link with the staff there.
And they were called in to do a watching brief on a piece of land,
which was where the New Riverfront Theatre was going to be.
And they phoned me quite excitedly because Kate Howell, who was the girl that was running it at the time,
said they'd found some curved timbers just underneath where the orchestra pit,
we know all this anyway.
So they were quite excited.
And so it looked like it was a boat or a ship, but nobody knew how big it was or exactly what date it was.
And it had a sort of key over the top.
So it was probably pre-1800s, but that's about all you could say.
So after some argument and debate with the council, they tried to keep very quiet about it.
Why did they try to keep quiet about it?
Well, because if this turned out to be a big, massive thing, it would hold the whole project up.
They weren't insured for this sort of hold-up.
And it could have cost them, well, it did in the end, millions.
So they kept very quiet about it.
But of course I knew because through the trust and also because my friendship with the staff in the museum was still there
because I used to go in and help them and tell them where things were and so on.
So it was agreed that they could excavate at least part of it, which they did.
And what they found was that it stretched from one side of where the orchestra pit was to the other side,
a little bit missing on either end beyond this or massive big iron-covered dams had been put in.
But most of it was inside, you know, if you were going to plan an excavation and you had to put a pit in,
you would almost put it exactly where it is, maybe a bit longer just to get the stern and the brow in.
But nobody still knew what the date was until one of our colleagues, Nigel Naling, who's now a professor,
I actually interviewed him for a job on the 7th Street a long time ago, but he's gone up in the world.
And he's a dentrotron and he was able to date a particular timber mixed up with it to 1457 or 8 or 9 or sometime around about then.
And of course that made it internationally important.
In the end it was discovered that his timber, I think, was a repair done in England or proposed repair on part of the ship.
But he found that, you know, bits had been repaired in England, but it took him a long time to get an actual date for the ship,
which would seem to have been built in what I call the Basque country in northern Spain.
What was the feeling? What was the sense? Was there great excitement?
Oh yes, yes, there was a lot of excitement. But of course most of the public didn't know.
But the word was getting around and so I was told by a reporter when it did blow, you know,
that he'd rang up the council and they were saying, well, what boat is this?
You know, they were denying its existence. But in the end the truth came out.
Was there a risk that they could have covered it back over them? Was that the...?
Well, I think, no, they couldn't even do that because what they would have had to have done was allow them to record sections of the ship,
remove a few of the timbers and the rest would have been bulldozed away because it was in the orchestra pit.
It was in the way. So we couldn't save it at all.
But anyway, the news got out and I was sort of interviewed by the reporter from the South Wales Argus, Mike Buckingham,
and he explained to him what was going on because the trust staff weren't allowed to say anything,
the museum staff weren't allowed to say anything, council wouldn't say anything.
But as I was a sort of volunteer in the know, I could actually tell them.
So, and then... Did you get a lot of flak for that then?
I don't think they were very happy with me, particularly. But there's nothing they could do about it.
But it was just too important to pretend it didn't exist and they didn't know what they were doing.
Was there a sense that the people of the city in the area were behind the project?
Oh yes, because what happened was immediately it got out.
Me, mainly through Charlie Ferris and other people, they set up a meeting and I was asked to talk,
so I was one of the speakers and they had international speakers coming along, you know.
And this was held in the Dolmen Theatre and various things were said.
And in the end, it didn't seem to get anywhere. I said, well look, as far as I understand it,
the archaeology trust, they haven't got any other option,
the contractors will have to move out in so many weeks' time and then the project will be destroyed.
So then that gelled them. So then it became the Save Our Ship campaign
and eventually the Friends of the Newport ship.
And they mounted a 24-hour vigil having people tooting their horns and processions.
And it was one of the most successful, I have some very clever people help me,
the most successful, all of the earliest internet protest campaigns.
And they actually brought down, of course, didn't take much to do that,
the local councils' websites and everything else, plus I think they were a shock on to the Welsh Assembly.
And we'd get people writing from, or coming in from all over the world, literally,
you know, from Australia, from America, obviously a lot from Europe as well,
including virtually all the eminent ship archaeologists as well, Margaret Rools of this world, you know,
and these sort of people. And so the campaign was huge.
So I think it was obviously very clear to the council they had to do something.
So they had a discussion with the Caddw and then with the National Assembly for Wales.
And they were offered, I think it was about three and a half million pounds,
to pay for the excavation of the ship and the eventual display of the ship.
But they were told they had to have somewhere where they could put it.
So a big idea, without consulting any of the archaeologists or museum people,
was they'd build another big pit within the site of the theatre,
and that would be used for displaying the Newport ship.
So anyway, a bit dubious about it when I heard about it, but this is what was proposed.
And so they then agreed, you know, the campaign was won.
The leader of the council, Sir Harry Jones, was seen down there, smiles all around, you know,
we are going to take it up. And they had to take it up piece by piece, you know, you couldn't lift it out.
And then it was, it had lots of officer help, including British Steel as it was then, you know,
and then there was a warehouse there when they took the tanks of water down there,
although they put the timbers down there which had to be kept in water.
Interestingly enough, they had to get water on this site and put in these big tanks in a large empty shed they had there.
And they got the water out of the local reams.
And when we went and then looked at it, it was absolutely infested with small shrimps and stuff like that,
which was okay, it didn't do too much harm.
And the timbers are so strong anyway.
So in the end they got some goldfish in and somebody managed to get a baby sturgeon,
which over the years I saw grow to about that, from about that.
And they left it, you know, selling until everything was washed and cleaned as part of the conservation process.
Then there was a huge wrangle because the director of the trust had told them
and he hoped to get the ship out in about six weeks, which was clearly impossible.
It took about six months.
So, I mean, without going into too many details, they said, okay, you go ahead and have the six months.
They weren't very happy about it.
They being the council?
The council, yes.
But it went ahead and it was successful.
I mean, in actual fact, it was very quick.
You know, if you think of another site as big as that, you could be there for years.
But they did it in about six months, cut it out.
How many, what were the numbers of the people working there?
They varied from 30 to 40 at the most, but they varied.
And they had specialists came in as well, like Nigel and others.
So, I used to go along and annoy them because I was allowed to go in and photograph them,
which they were grateful for afterwards because when they were reassembling it,
I'd taken photographs of timbers which had been misplaced so they could work out where they went.
So that was all right.
But it was a long job.
But I was really there on a supporting level.
I wasn't really taking part in the excavation or the recording or the conservation process,
which were all sort of, you know, breaking new ground all the time, particularly in the recording.
Conservation had been done before, but this was new techniques coming in as well.
Unlike the Mary Rose, for instance, this preserved much better and quicker
because of course it was all in bits and you could treat all the timbers individually.
And the fines kept coming up.
And so I got involved in looking at the fines as well.
But of course nobody knew exactly what the ship was.
It was assumed it was a British ship.
Most of them traded from Bristol, but it was a vast one.
Probably thought at that time to be about 300 tonnes or could carry about 300 tonnes.
They found barrel remains and everything else, including marks of merchants and so I was delving into them.
But there were a lot of the timbers there were obviously for rebuilding the ship
because they had been badly damaged and massive timbers, and that's the ones that Nigel managed to date.
So I was having a think.
I was thinking, well, who on earth could afford to either repair or build a ship of this size?
So thanks to Newport, they gave me a bit of money to do some research.
And so I went around researching various places and I did a lot on Medieval Newport, which I found out for the first time.
One of the things I discovered was that at the time the Newport ship was in Newport.
It had been towed in there because it certainly didn't seem to be a Newport ship as such.
It was right in the middle of the Walls of the Roses.
And at that time the man we all call Warwick the Kingmaker had actually succeeded in capturing Newport
as part of territories of the then Earl or the late Earl of Pembrokes, as he soon became, mooting his head.
But it was all taken over by Warwick.
And by looking through the archives, particularly in Warwick themselves and elsewhere,
we were able to find out quite a lot of information, including the fact that somebody was paid to bring the ship to Newport,
a ship to Newport at that time, and other people were paid to repair the ship at Newport.
And it was a similar size and it was in 1469, which is spot on the date.
So with a lot of arguing, it didn't prove anything, according to some, but I think the experts as a whole realised
there was nothing else they could compare it to.
So I'm pretty certain, you can never say never, but 99.9% certain that the references were relating to Newport ships.
So I was able to bring in this royal connection and the Walls of the Roses connection, which is what you'd expect.
And this led to all sorts of other discoveries of the historical nature in particular.
So that was my contribution, if you like.
Would you describe the Newport ship as the jewel in your crane, or are there other things that you would consider?
Micro? Well, it's certainly the biggest individual item I've ever had to deal with, if you don't count buildings.
But I've been on sites all over the place. I was up on Hadrian's Wall, down in the Pyrenees,
involved in the fishbowl on Roman Palace excavations, and I've discovered lots of different things in my different jobs
just by going out and looking. But it was interesting with this, because by using a location where the ship was found,
I was able to prove, really for the first time, that we knew that Newport was a walled town.
And so that was another project which went from there, and I don't want to prove where the original Merringer's House was,
and what the layout was, and so on and so forth. So I became Mr. Medieval Newport, very much so.
But even the eminent archaeologists had to, or historians at that point, had to agree and be fair. They got tremendous backing.
Professionally, not just the ship, but all those other finds along the estuary, it must be an incredibly rich period to be working in.
It is, but there are two things. One is that if you drop something in mud, it gradually becomes anaerobic, there's no air in there, it gets preserved.
For instance, at Caldecott, they're even finding ladybirds mixed up with it, with, you know, the kiln still red with a bit of black spots on.
When we were digging out the trackway, which we call the Upton Trackway, that had leaves, twigs and very fine material, because it was buried and it wasn't disturbed.
And nobody knew it was there, and there it remained until you got one of these really fierce storms, which could happen thousands of years later, which exposed it.
So what was the Upton Trackway? What was that?
Well, that was our first trackway we discovered with Derek Upton. We called it the Upton Trackway because it was after him.
Near Sudbrook, was that in the estuary?
It was near Chapel Tunk, where the other side was. It was near Magor Pill. That was one of the first things we discovered.
So, you know, and all the miscellaneous stuff, yes, it was incredibly rich. There are all sorts of other fascinating things.
For instance, there's an area which goes all the way along the side of the Wendt Noot levels. We were looking elsewhere as well, but along the Wendt Noot level, you could go and you could pick up sort of spitfire shells, you know, using it as a firing range for practicing spitfires.
In fact, there was a spitfire that was buried there, and Derek helped to dig out.
In the same area, you could find sort of 19th century lead shot. So they're using it as a firing range there.
From the prehistoric period, we were finding things like arrowheads. So, you know, it's sort of the same purpose, being there, even though the conditions in the land, you know, the sea levels have gone up and down.
Sometimes it's been wooded, sometimes the floods have come in and compressed it and the peat, and so it all became mudflaps again. So there's a whole series of dynamics going on there.
And it's a massively complicated area and lots of people looking at that sort of side of it.
You said that you found, out there in the estuary, you found ancient putters and ranks?
Yep. Yes, I'll have to go up to the den and dig out some of the photographs just to show you.
But yes, a lot of them are obviously now recorded.
I must have seven levels of research committees set up, which I no longer are involved in because I'm sort of retired too far now to get back into that side of it.
And lots of these discoveries are published in there and published in different magazines.
And lots were in the papers. And a selection you can see obviously still in the museum in Newport.
But that's only a tiny tip of the iceberg to what was discovered.
And they were... Sorry, sorry. Oh, sorry. I was just going to ask, because of course you've had very deep involvement in Newport heritage for quite a long time.
Prior to the Newport ship discovery, did you detect that there was a sort of long-term build-up of frustration with the council's approach to heritage, or was it a very sudden thing in 2002?
Well, that was that specific point. To be fair to the council, when I arrived in 1983 they'd just built a new museum, well, they'd built a new museum.
They were in the process of wanting it updated and improved. And I got tremendous support.
And of course they did the same thing with Traditia House. I mean, they took on that when it was in danger of being demolished.
And now with the National Trust, of course. There was some money around. So I wouldn't say that was the case at all.
There could be a bit, on the planning side, there could be a bit bad, in a sense that they didn't seem to realise that a lot of the historic buildings they had in the town, which disappeared.
And basically anything that could bring a job took precedence over any of the cultural side. But that was a planning issue really.
Not supporting the actual facilities which we had was different.
And that attitude obviously has changed over the years. And now there's very strict planning guidance terms.
And they've got a very good team, or did have, when they had people looking at planning matters and so on.
So I don't see that as a particular problem. But no, there was no problems at all until this bloody boat came up.
Oh well, I have to delete bloody. Because that was holding up another key project.
And so when it came to the Arts Centre or Arts Theatre, all this dubious yet another boat, there was no question there,
and mine's just keep quiet about it and get it out of the way as quickly as possible. And they failed.
You stuck your neck out there in the bit really, didn't you?
Well, I had, they couldn't, in fact, when I got my pension they couldn't do anything about that.
But what they did do, and that was about that time, was that when the Royal Gwent Archaeological Trust,
who hadn't been involved in saying anything about it, finished their contract, they said, right, we're not going to pay you.
They said, you've said six weeks, ten six months, you know, we're not paying you after the six weeks.
This was despite the fact that they'd never said anything about that before.
They'd been monitoring all their records, including how much they were paying staff and the rest of it.
And it nearly brought the Trust down. So I was very involved in that.
In fact, I've still got the papers, although the more sensitive ones I put in the embargo on and sent to the Gwent Archives.
But, you know, it was a very nasty business and it was a, you know, it went on for ages.
And fortunately, all those involved in it have now gone.
And it didn't help them anyway because they'd been told by their conservator, Kate Hunter,
that the gallery they were putting in and it would not fit the ship.
The experts had come along and said it wouldn't fit the ship.
Staff at the museum elsewhere were told under threat of losing their jobs and discipline.
If they said anything other than the party line, that they were for the chop.
But we knew it wouldn't work.
And it was only after most of these people had seen the writing on the wall and left.
I won't mention any names, but they appointed a new guy who was then a sort of museum services manager.
That's Mike Lewis, who is still there and has gone through hell of a way, you know, with all the cut packs and everything else.
But he's kept the project going and he backed the conservator and backed the other people.
And he convinced, not in that but he convinced the council that they were right.
What they were told was wrong.
I remember going to a meeting much later on and there were some councillors there.
Some of them would just glare at me.
And it was a political, you see.
And one of them, a sweet old guy, said, will our ship fit in that basement?
And I said, well, some of it would.
I'm trying to be diplomatic.
But the message got out because obviously they'd heard it at sort of highest possible levels.
But they just wouldn't take advice.
And they paid the price.
Well, we paid the price and they've just gone on and elsewhere.
But anyway, there's been total change around in regime.
Support is there.
And the big problem these days is austerity.
There's support for the project.
The support is there.
But they've got to get money to do it.
Do you generally think the outlook for the ship is quite good at the moment?
I think so.
Whether it will be re-displayed in my lifetime is another matter.
And last I heard, and I'm not really up to date with it, I'll have to talk to Martin Lewis,
the idea was to sort of put it on the top of the present museum or to that building.
Because one of the troubles about having a new museum and new display,
it's not just the cost of putting it in, the capital cost, if you like,
because that can usually be found from lottery heritage or whatever.
It's the running costs.
But of course if it's part of an existing project, which is why they want it in the front,
there are people there.
And the building is there.
So it's sort of much more economical.
But no, I won't, but there were huge problems and very vicious things going on,
which I perhaps better not go into now.
What was it for Chewitus that you met Derek Upton?
Very few Chewitus.
Derek just happened to come into the museum when we were wanting material.
I said, where did you find it, Derek?
And so he took us out there.
And from then on, he'd been telling people about what he'd been finding for years,
and the odd things which had been taken normally by the National Museum of Dunnely.
They'd accepted, you know, bronze spearhead, this sort of thing.
But nobody had really wanted to go out with him, you know.
And we just went everywhere together.
We became really close friends and went round to his house
and heard all these rambles and recollections.
And he was divorced.
And he had his son Dean living with him.
And he said one of the reasons divorce went through was because of his collecting.
And including he had found this sort of big cannonball,
which he'd brought in and put by the back door as a store stop.
And thought nothing about it until he started weeping something out of it.
And eventually, somehow, somebody in the know said,
well, I think you should get the bomb squad in there.
They did. And it had been full of nitroglycerin.
So maybe she had a point.
But he collected all this stuff.
He had, you know, masses of it he gave to us.
Very generous with it.
But he wasn't an archaeologist. He was just an enthusiast.
Well, he was out there. You know, he lived his life there.
And he worked in a steelworks one time.
But what he was, was he was the honorary warden for the Seven Estuary
for the Gwent Wildlife Trust, which incidentally I went on to be the deputy general as well.
And so he was involved in Magelmarsh and all these projects and in the Seven Estuary.
So he became Mr. Seven Estuary and knew a lot about it.
And of course, in the course of that, he got into the archaeology.
And I think the natural historians and the ecologists were a bit worried
that he was going to sort of give up all that side of it and do it.
But of course, they're so interrelated that it was just marvelous.
And much later on, I was invited by the Gwent Wildlife Trust to do a survey
from the historical archaeological point of I think 14 of their sites, including Magelmarsh.
So that, you know, I found a lot more information that way.
That was after I retired from the museum.
So were the reams, you know, a rich source of archaeology?
Yes.
Did anything emerge from them though?
Yes, lots of stuff.
Again, it's a matter of finding it.
You know, if it's in the ground, how do you know it's there?
Well, of course, when Gwent Euro Park went in near, what's her name, the hill there,
near Magor anyway, that's when the Balmonds Farm boat came up.
But a bit further on, they found huge pits and remains of a hard-aged settlement there.
There had been obviously monastic settlements on there.
A lot of people got very interested in the training of the levels and the sea walls
and lots of arguments even today on the dating of things.
And so there was a lot of training going on.
Certainly on the Ramblin levels, which is the other side of Newport,
the University of Reading got very actively involved in doing sedimentology.
And their archaeologists discovered a whole series of reams
which went beyond the sea wall into the floodplain,
well the floodplain onto the Intertidal area.
And these were Roman, you know, so the Romans had been doing it.
So it's a hugely complicated area.
Masses and masses of reports.
I hesitate to take you upstairs because where all my working notes are and everything
because it's in a mess, but I can show you up there if you want.
And you can see the stuff I've got.
So before you came here, Bob, where had you been?
I mean, because it's massively interesting, unusual landscape, isn't it?
You know, with the water drainage and the reams.
Was that a surprise? Was that a bonus?
Well, I knew the levels were here.
Because I was actually for nine years before that,
I was curator at Kingsley Museum, which is on the edge of the Fens.
So we were involved in the archaeology there.
Didn't find King John's treasure, but we found lots of other stuff.
And there was a massive amount of stuff that came out there.
And also industrial archaeology with the draining of the Fens and so on.
So the levels was, you know, it's like repeating myself in many ways.
So that's where my interest in it started.
I had a good idea of what was going on here.
You mentioned that you filmed or took photographs of the last Putra rank at Gold Coast, is that right?
Yeah.
When was that?
I did it on slides. So I'll have to look at the slides.
Is that because you knew it was coming to an end and they had to be recorded?
No, just because it was interesting. I didn't know it was going to end then.
But it ended soon afterwards. Just a nice picture.
I took lots of them.
I got a lovely one, which is about a mile out in Yestery, looking back towards Goldcliff Point.
Just in front of me is a big pool about the size of this room.
In the middle was a red Renault 4, half submerged in the water.
It looked brand new.
I sort of wondered if there was somebody still in it, but there wasn't.
But you'd find all sorts of stuff dumped by the ships there.
What sort of things?
Well, lots, for instance, to give you an example, around Nash.
There are sort of banks going on either side of the usk.
And the ships used to dump everything out of there.
I've got a few bits upstairs, but there's a lot in the museum.
I've got things like shipping lines, porcelain.
But above all things like clay pipe bowls.
Derek had hundreds of these he'd picked up.
I've got four or five upstairs.
Pottery, obviously.
Wooden stuff.
There's a ship's fender, which we picked up, took back to the museum.
Stuff washed out and prehistoric stuff from elsewhere.
Everything under the sun you can think of.
And it'd all get washed up against the seawall, the high tide marks.
So you arrived in the early 80s, and then the dockland area,
was there an active place then?
Oh, yeah, it had been going.
I think the town dock was about 1840, was it?
Oh, earlier than that, I can't remember.
You've snorled this stuff.
I'm going to see now.
But anyway, so that's certainly 19th century.
So, I mean, Newport was a massive port because of, you know,
it's where the canals and the railways came from, the valleys,
bringing down iron and coal and stuff.
You know, it wasn't ever as big as Cardiff, but it was vastly important.
And this was the Lord Tridiga or the Morgan family at Tridiga House.
It owned, you know, lots of the land here.
It had what was called the Golden Mile, which was in the railway,
which went through their land and their estates,
and every truck they got a payment on.
So they became vastly wealthy.
And so they paid for huge amounts of things in Newport, you know,
rebuilding and so on and so forth.
I was just wondering, because the docks are now, you know, by all accounts,
you can't just walk in anymore.
No, you can't.
You know, Jan, for example, has got a fantastic interview
with a woman who was a prostitute there during the war, for example.
Yeah, the colour.
Down at the Waterloo Arms, no doubt.
Well, I just wonder whether, as a curator,
whether one records what's happening now.
I suppose it's probably what we're doing.
To a degree, I mean, it depends, because it depends whether you've got the time.
I mean, I've been down there quite a number of times.
And you can still get on the docks quite easily,
because I took my scrap boiler when they put a new boiler in,
a hot water boiler, a copper one, got 60 quid for it.
You know, that was well worth it, you know, I went down there.
So, you know, with the flimsy sort of excuses you can get down and see.
Obviously it's not a patch on what it was in its heyday,
but it's still a very active report.
Trinnega House, I should ask you about that, really.
So, your time working in Newport, what was your contact with Trinnega?
Well, according to my job description,
I was responsible for overseeing Trinnega House.
And there was a really brilliant guy called David Freeman,
who knew exactly what he was doing, running it.
And I said, no, you do what you want, David, I'll just support you.
And so he did that.
But when he left, you know, I went down there and worked for a little while,
just to help things tick over.
Was it open to the public then?
Oh, yes. Yes, but in those days they were guided tours.
A lot of the rooms were still empty, they still are.
And it was just a long, long business of finding bits of stuff to go in there,
particularly things which had belonged to the family.
And so stuff came in.
Sometimes it was bought, sometimes it was on loan, and sometimes it was given.
So that process is still going on.
The restoration work, again, you know, is always needed, lots doing to it,
and it still does.
So it's one reason why the National Trust has taken it on,
because council can no longer afford it because of the austerity measures,
and it saved it, you know.
But if it hadn't been for the early days, particularly David Freeman
and then director Alf Robke and others that supported him,
he wouldn't have survived.
And he had great fans as well.
Princess Margaret, when she was died, was one of his personal friends,
so she would come down and have tea in his cottage by Tredegar House.
So he knew everybody and we might sort of interfere with that,
so I just mainly concentrated on the museum.
So what was his background then? What do you know about him?
David, oh, goodness. I'm not sure about his early history, he's still around.
Is he?
Oh, yes. He was a close friend of...
Who's the fashion designer? Settle Beaton, is it?
Oh, really?
Yes, very, very. When I say close, I mean close.
And when Settle died, he inherited his house and everything else,
so he lived there, but he's a really enthusiastic, effervescent sort of character.
He must be rather ancient, though, surely.
He's younger than me.
Gosh, he must have been a very young friend of Settle Beaton.
He was a young friend. I'll go into that.
Does he still live locally, then?
Well, he lives...
Oh, it's out in...
Oh, wow, I can't remember the name of the place, but it settles Beaton's house,
which is sort of, I don't know, somewhere in Hampshire or somewhere around about there.
I'm not sure where. He did have a...
Oh, no, but he still got a flat at Cardiff Bay.
And of course, when he was working, he lived in a flat at Trudiga House.
Okay, so it would be interesting to talk to him, maybe.
Oh, definitely.
I don't suppose you have a contact, do you?
Well, I send him a Christmas card, and then he sends me one the next year,
so I then send him one the year afterwards.
But somewhere I've got his address.
Yeah, it might be really...
But, I mean, Trudiga House wouldn't know where he was.
I mean, he's still involved in schemes there, like the...
There's a voluntary scheme for helping people with mental problems in the gardens and so on,
and he's been very actively involved in that.
They're unlikely to give me his number, though, aren't they?
Mm-hm.
Trudiga House are unlikely to give me his address, I should think.
Well, you may be able to contact him there, but if not, I'll have to just have to dig it out, that's all.
Yeah, I'd be grateful. Thank you.
So, just on the levels, so it sounds a bit of a clich question, really,
but is there any find you've discovered that really sticks, apart from the ship, that really, you know, stays with you?
Well, and the Ballinsfarm boat, of course.
Yeah.
They were the two major ones.
I think it's just the quantity of stuff, you know.
The most exciting moment was the village at...
In Eln Edge Village, which we discovered near Goldcliffe, of Pill,
because he was just going, you're finding one thing, and then there was Derek and myself,
and about three or four others, and then there was something else, and then there was something else,
and then there was something else, you know, and you knew exactly what it all was,
and you just couldn't believe it, you know.
It must have been overwhelming trying to curate all this.
Well, it was there, you know, and you went back to the foreshore again, and onto the bank, and it all got covered by the sea,
so, but I mean, what happened there was, of course, that Martin Bell, I don't know if you've come across Martin,
he came along and said, would you mind if I deal with some of this stuff?
No, go ahead, Martin.
So, you know, he had the proper people and the proper resources went into it,
and some massive reports came out, and he's still working now.
Yeah, he's on my list of people to interview, actually.
A great guy, and, you know, he did it properly.
Did you ever come across Sir Hampy Tennyson?
Yes.
The Pontic Boule estate?
Yes, so did you have, what sort of gene did you have with the Pontic Boule estate?
Not a huge amount, because I knew him through the Monmouth Surinquarian Society,
and I wasn't really studying his papers as much as going into archives,
and doing that, which I had close, I still have close connections with.
And they were tremendous when I was doing my medieval Newport,
because they were finding stuff all over the place and telling me about it, you know.
Wow, actually we've got a meeting, we're going there next Thursday afternoon.
Well, the Moray Guards, particularly Tony Hopkins.
Oh, Tony's at Ebbw Vale?
Yep.
Yeah, so we're going to the Glamorgan one.
Oh, that's in Swansea, yes.
So did you know Tony then?
I knew Tony, when he was at the Quintal Cup.
He translated a lot of the documents from the Warwick letter and so on for me.
Oh really? Gosh.
So he was a great supporter, and I don't think I could have managed it without him actually.
So is he a Latin scholar then?
Well, he can read medieval Latin, which I can't.
Well, I try and I get the odd words, you know.
Although the Warwick letter was written in English, but it was still sort of old-fashioned English.
Are there any other characters you've met over the years that you should record?
Yes, well, unfortunately you can't record Derek.
No.
Because he's not there. Come in, Tickham, have you come across him?
Oh, get him. He was a great friend of Derek's, and he's involved with the, or was involved with the Gwent Wildlife Trust.
And I'm sure they would put you straight on to him.
And he used to go around giving lectures, and they used to have this, the groupies that go around.
He found stuff for us, and he set up a reserve at, what's it called, Brockweir, or somewhere.
Anyway, it's actually not far again from Magor, the village of Magor, and it's now a trust reserve.
And it was his family's farm, and he knows a huge amount.
I mean, he concentrates on the natural history, but also living there.
So that's what the reserve is at Magor?
Not the Magor Marsh Reserve, the Brockwell Farm, which is another reserve in the area.
I'm going to have to take you upstairs, I'm going to have to apologise in advance, because the working area is up there.
Oh, don't worry, that would be fantastic. Shall I turn this off?
Yeah, you can do that.
That was fascinating. Thank you so much. Thank you so much.
I was just wondering if over the years you've had much involvement also with the transporter bridge?
Off and on, off and on. It didn't used to be part of the museum collections, now Mike has got it as part of the museum collections.
But I had to do, I had to write some articles for it and do a bit of research in it.
And of course the Newport Schiff staff were involved.
Apart from doing historical stuff, my biggest contribution regarding the Newport transporter bridge was when I arrived and I wanted a display put in about it.
And I had a contact, Derek, no not Derek, anyway, a guy who made models.
And I got in touch with him and he did almost as a labour of love the model that's in the Newport Museum now, which was then working, so you could, I think we go back, and that's a fantastic model.
So I was responsible for that coming.
Did you ever use it? Did you ever use the bridge?
Oh yes, which model or the real one?
The real one.
Oh yes, well yes, I've been across it on foot and on car and over the top and everywhere, yes of course.
Did you ever hang beneath it? I've spoken to a couple of people who used to hang beneath it and then drop off.
No, it never really appealed to me.
I thought, knowing me, I'd probably hang down and jump straight into the gondola or something.
But no, it's a rather silly idea.
Yes.
I think people commit suicide that way, on the Seven Bridge they did the same.
Have you ever found any bodies in the peat?
Yes.
Yes?
Yes, lots of skulls and stuff like that.
In fact I've had a very long argument with, not sure if nailing, well not argument at all, but discussion I should think would be a better way of putting it.
Because when the Newport ship was excavated, where the struts supporting the ship were, beneath that they found a skeleton, a headless skeleton.
And immediately people were talking about it being sacrifices and everything else.
But it predated the ship, in fact turned out to be iron age, or everything seems to be iron age.
And the people who were writing the report were talking about it being headless because of the head was sacrificed separately.
Well they didn't have Derek Upton's experience, nor him talking with the police, which I listened to.
And all the time you find bodies of people which have drowned in the usk or in the cell, happens frequently.
I can come in to some nice gruesome stories now.
But anyway, basically what tends to happen is somebody either dies or commits suicide or falls overboard, their body floats and it will float up with the tide, which is a massive tide, and then out again.
So it will go in and out.
Now the weakest point in the body is in the neck.
So the necks tend to come away and the heads go off.
So if you then find a headless body alongside the bank, you can assume that it's not necessarily a human sacrifice or anything like that.
There are other things, at least Derek's stories rather than me, because he used to tell them all to me.
There was one case just on the other side, on the Bristol side, but he was trying to cross over at low tide.
And he came across a pair of boots which were upright like this, with human bones sticking in their head.
Someone had got stuck in the mud.
Oh my goodness!
So I then went on to...
I mean that's almost comical but tragic.
I know, yes.
And then I went on, you know, because most people get trapped because of quicksands out there and everything.
And the mud is thick, you know.
The number of parties we've taken out there, they've lost their wellies.
I mean I did it, but then we get blasey about it.
We take the students out there and they're all stuck and we're just sort of walking around because we know how to walk in the mud.
And so they're always coming back covered in mud.
We used to be washed down in the house when we came back because we were so bad.
But I said to Derek, I said, well, did you ever get stuck there?
And he said, oh yes, once I did.
He decided he'd walk out to Denny Island.
So he went at the very lowest tide possible.
But there's a channel between Denny Island and us and he just couldn't get through the channel.
So he didn't get that way to Denny Island.
So he started walking back and he got stuck in some mud and he couldn't get out.
So he was lying flat on his face.
So I looked at him and said, well, Derek, why are you still here today then?
He said, well, when the tide came in, it sucks me out.
And I swam in with the tide.
Wow.
A number of people have tried that and it hasn't worked.
So it's really tragic in a sense, the way he died in the end, which I won't go into.
No.
What other stories did he tell you, this adventures out in the estuary?
Oh, well, I mean, Spitfire was quite a good one.
They knew of Spitfire, so he helped to dig it out.
They come to me and I go.
Some of the unusual stuff he's found.
There was one occasion when I went out with him and another friend of mine called Roger James and his wife.
Roger is, well, he was, probably still is, the president of the Wild Life Trust, whatever the title is.
A very nice guy and very knowledgeable.
But he found this enormous long bow.
Oh, he found this about this long.
And so I was there with Derek and Cindy, who was his friend, and Roger.
We wandered along and we said, well, we'll have to take this back because it could be a sort of giant aurochs.
So Roger had to carry this thing, bloody thing, miles back over the mud to the bank.
So we got it there.
And so we got back to the museum and actually got an identification done on it.
It was a giraffe leg bone.
Giraffe leg bone.
So it's amazing what you find out there.
So, yeah, it's really weird.
But yeah, lots of stories about Derek, I mean, of him wandering out there and discovering things.
But I think it was getting his knowledge out there.
And it came to the point, you know, when I certainly wasn't sidelined, but I left them to it.
He would talk to Martin Bell, for instance.
None of them would go out without Derek because Derek knew so much.
And they would say, listen, he wasn't a trained archaeologist or an academic.
He would just say, no, that could hurt.
And so they'd all sort of think again about what they'd been pronunciating.
And he was right.
And I think he got an honorary doctorate given to him in university.
But he was sort of modest and assuming.
But he did like taking young ladies out there.
And as I said, sort of, you know, he would take groups out there and quite often they would get stuck.
He would have to help them out again.
But he'd take me back to his house and he lived there with his son Dean.
And he collected crassulas in a little plant.
So he had them. But the house was just a mass of stuff.
He discovered bottles, you know.
A lot of these early bottles were quite valuable, you know.
Just as an aside, did the Museum and Art Gallery ever have anything to do with the School of Documentary Photography?
David Hearn?
Oh, yes. Yes.
Mainly through Ron McCormack.
Yeah.
If you come across Ron.
No.
Well, he used to be head of the Documentary Photography thing.
And when I arrived there, he was in the eighties and he's long retired.
And each year they had what they call the Newport Survey.
And the Museum would commission them.
Students go out and they did all sorts of different subjects.
I haven't got any here, I don't think, but I've had them in the Museum and the Library.
And they had two different themes.
It might be still working, sort of life down in pill or whatever it was.
And each student would take a different theme.
And they were put together and they would produce a book.
And this went on for about 12 years.
In those days we had some money, so we were able to help fund it as well.
So there's copies at the Museum, do you think?
Oh, yes.
Oh, gosh, I didn't, yeah.
Yeah, the whole thing is still there.
I haven't got any copies at all, I don't know why.
But it's well worth looking at.
Because that School of Photography was sort of internationally well known.
Phenomenal.
It's a great tragedy when they're closing university here.
I saw David Herden about a fortnight ago talking to me about when he's petted up.
He was living in a camper van by the lighthouse the first year of that.
Which I thought was quite extraordinary.
And just go back to the Spitfire, was it shot down over St. Broads?
Well, it crashed there.
It crashed, sorry, not shot down.
They've been in Germany, it might have been, but it might have been shot down, I don't know.
Was the pilot ever identified?
Yeah, I think so, I think it was known about.
It wasn't one I was directly involved in, so I can't give you the details.
So were there other things from the Second World War?
And I was talking to a lady last week.
A parachute had come down, and they took the parachute.
She made an Italian POW, who happened to be a tailor, made her a silk blouse.
She kept it for years and years and years.
I just wonder if there's any other things that came from it.
Oh, there's lots.
We talk about the prisoners of war, for instance.
Down at Underwood there was a prisoner of war camp there.
And lots of prisoners were kept there.
And some of them actually came out and worked on farms here.
There are lots of evidence, you know, from pill boxes to little platforms for anti-aircraft guns all the way around Newport.
And Jan could tell you a lot more about it than I could.
So there's lots of evidence and some bombing, but got off lightly compared to Swansea or places like that.
Well, I'm going to turn this off now, Bob.
Thank you. I'm sure we could talk all day.
Thank you so much. That was absolutely fascinating.